Both the counting model and neural net models converge to the same P (the output of probabilities for each character), this happens because the the loss function of the neural net is the mean of the negative log likelihood across all the inputs and their respective outputs. This means that as you minimize loss, the closer the values will approach the raw counting values (each cell's count normalized by the row sum) until they are functionally the same matrix. 
In order to output a probability matrix, a technique called softmax was used. This involves taking the logits, exp-ing them, and normalizing them. This process stays consistent even across more complex NN structures such as transformers.
one_hot is used to essentially just simulate row selection using matrix multiplication, since all the entries in the row of one-hot besides the one inputted is 0. (xenc @ W) where xenc is the one_hot output is essentially just a glorified lookup.
In sum(dim=1, keepdim=True), dim is equal to 1 because we are looking to sum row-wise, not column wise. The keepdim is necessary to keep the shape of (27, 1) instead of just (27), as during matrix multiplication, the (27) creates a bug in the calculation, where you end up normalizing by the wrong axis. 
NLL stands for negative log likelihood. Likelihood describes the product of the probabilities that the model assigns to the correct next character. You want this as high as possible. The issue with this is that you end up multiplying a lot of numbers between 0-1 together, which leads to the likelihood becoming unusably small. To combat this, the log of each probability is taken and summed, which makes the number stable and differentiable. The issue with raw log, is that as you optimize it becomes more negative, which goes against a loss function as for a loss function, you want to move in a negative direction. Therefore, a negative log likelihood is used.